Spec v3: Add deletion vectors to the table spec (#11240)
apache/iceberg: format/spec.md

* New data types: nanosecond timestamp(tz)
* Default value support for columns
* Multi-argument transforms for partitioning and sorting

> * Binary deletion vectors

Reviewer: The Puffin spec says `delete vector`, we say `deletion vector` here. Which form is more accurate?

Reviewer 2: `deletion vector` seems to be slightly more accurate imo, so maybe we should also update https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/11238 to call it `deletion-vector-v1`

Author: Aren't they synonyms? I can change it, I guess.

Author: Updated.

* Default value support for columns
* Multi-argument transforms for partitioning and sorting
* Row Lineage tracking
* Binary deletion vectors

> 

Reviewer: Is the extra new line needed?

Author: Rebase issue. I'll fix these. Thanks!

`data_file` is a struct with the following fields:

| v1         | v2         | v3         | Field id, name                    | Type                         | Description |
| ---------- | ---------- | ---------- |-----------------------------------|------------------------------|-------------|

> |            | _required_ | _required_ | **`134  content`**                | `int` with meaning: `0: DATA`, `1: POSITION DELETES`, `2: EQUALITY DELETES` | Type of content stored by the data file: data, equality deletes, or position deletes (all v1 files are data files) |

Reviewer 3: I don't have a strong opinion, but for completeness did you consider adding `3: Deletion Vector`?  I think it potentially makes it clearer that the data contained is not tabular in nature but this might not have any real advantage.

Reviewer 3: I will note, that equality_ids takes the approach of requiring, content type 2 below, so it might be more consistent to have a new enum.

Reviewer: I think we should continue to use `1` for the new position deletes files because they actually contain position deletes. The file format will be `puffin`.

Reviewer 3: @aokolnychyi after our threads on the puffin spec.  I think the fundamental question here is actually where and how redundantly to store content type.  There are three possible places:
1.  In the footer of puffin (this is required anyways).
2. As a magic number in the content of deletion vector (currently implemented as it is inherited from Delta Lake)
3. Here as an additional content type (deletion-vector-v1).

After thinking about it I think it might make some sense to store it here versus again in the content as a magic number (or maybe in addition to the content type).  This is for two (mostly minor reasons):
1. It can save 3 bytes
2.  It allows feature usage to be introspected from manifests, rather than requiring reading the deletion vector (e.g. if we ever come up with a v2 of the deletion vector, people can look at relative distribution without parsing the puffing files at all).

Reviewer 3: Left another proposal on the comment thread of [file format name](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/11240/files#r1797420599) thoughts @aokolnychyi ?

Author: I think we should continue to set this as `1: POSITION DELETES` because that's what the content represents. Both file/pos deletes in Parquet/Avro/ORC and deletion vectors are applied to data files the same way during planning (and this spec update helps by introducing `referenced_data_file` to speed up v2 planning). I think it makes the most sense to track how the deletes are serialized in the `format` field.

That raises the question about what to use in the format field. I think that `puffin` fits with the other format names because it is the format of the entire data file. If you wanted to go inspect that file, you'd instantiate a Puffin reader.

Both of these choices fit with how v2 works today. Where this gets a bit tricky is that we are also changing the granularity. Instead of having a single entry per Puffin file, we are tracking individual deletion vectors (using the now renamed `content_size_in_bytes` and `content_offset`) to cut down on false positives.

Now that we are pointing to a slice of a Puffin file of position deletes, I think there's an argument that we could/should store the blob type somewhere: that way we have both file type and the type of the content pointed to by the offset. If anything I'd introduce a `content_type` field for this. But given that the type is always going to be the same and there's an open question about whether we would just detect the type from magic bytes, I would opt to simply omit it for now.

TL;DR: What we're really looking for is a content type for the blob, but we don't need one right now so let's leave our options open and omit it.

| _required_ | _required_ | _required_ | **`100  file_path`**              | `string`                     | Full URI for the file with FS scheme |

> | _required_ | _required_ | _required_ | **`101  file_format`**            | `string`                     | String file format name, `avro`, `orc`, `parquet`, or `puffin` |

Reviewer 3: nit: we should note that puffin is only used for storing deletion vectors (this might not be obvious for first time readers, since all deletion vectors are only discussed below this point)

Reviewer 3: Another question here, if the intent is really to be compatible with delta lake, maybe this should just be called "blob" storage isn't tied to puffin, and users have the ability to store this in other locations?

Reviewer 3: After thinking about it some more, I think I'd be more in favor of keeping content [type above](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/pull/11240/files#r1796418244) and calling this `delete-vector-v1-blob`.  Implementations still must write this as a puffin file but this leaves flexibility for readers without violating the spec.

Author: I replied to this in the thread above.

I think this field should continue to be the overall file format (puffin here) and that if anything we want a type for the blob. However, we only have one case right now so let's add that when we need it.

Reviewer 3: OK, I think we should add a not that puffin is only used for storing DVs (maybe a link to the DV section?)

| _optional_ | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`128  upper_bounds`**           | `map<129: int, 130: binary>` | Map from column id to upper bound in the column serialized as binary [1]. Each value must be greater than or equal to all non-null, non-Nan values in the column for the file [2] |
| _optional_ | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`131  key_metadata`**           | `binary`                     | Implementation-specific key metadata for encryption |
| _optional_ | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`132  split_offsets`**          | `list<133: long>`            | Split offsets for the data file. For example, all row group offsets in a Parquet file. Must be sorted ascending |
|            | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`135  equality_ids`**           | `list<136: int>`             | Field ids used to determine row equality in equality delete files. Required when `content=2` and should be null otherwise. Fields with ids listed in this column must be present in the delete file |
| _optional_ | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`140  sort_order_id`**          | `int`                        | ID representing sort order for this file [3]. |

> |            | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`143  referenced_data_file`**   | `string`                     | Fully qualified location (URI with FS scheme) of a data file that all deletes reference [4] |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
|            | _optional_ |            | **`143  referenced_data_file`**   | `string`                     | Fully qualified location (URI with FS scheme) of a data file that all deletes reference [4] |
```

Do we want to support this in v2?

Author: @wgtmac, yes we do want to support it in v2. This is a good optimization for file-scoped deletes that we already support. If you have a position delete file that references only one data file, we can speed up planning by using this.

> |            |            | _optional_ | **`144  blob_offset`**            | `long`                       | The offset in the file where the content starts [5] |

Reviewer: If we call it `blob_XXX`, do we assume they will only be used to reference Puffin blobs? Do we ever see us referencing a row group or a page from a Parquet file?

Reviewer 5: maybe `content_offset` and `content_size_in_byte` which also match the descriptions.

Reviewer 5: > Might also be more clear to briefly explain the scenario of multiplexing multiple delete vector in one Puffin file

It is explained later in the doc `Multiple deletion vectors can be stored in the same file`. But readers might not have that context here

> |            |            | _optional_ | **`145  blob_size_in_bytes`**     | `long`                       | The length of a referenced blob stored in the file [5] |

Author: These last 3 lines are the only changes. Otherwise the rows are the same but with the v2 requirements copied to the new v3 column.

Reviewer 3: Is there a reason blob_size_in_bytes needed?  Isn't blob_offset sufficient? If this is an optimization to bypass reading the footer, then it seems that compression would also be required here, or explicitly disallowed for the bitmaps?

Reviewer 3: Also, line 464 is a change.

Reviewer: We need `blob_size_in_byte` so that we can compare the total Puffin size to the size of the individual DV blob without opening up the Puffin file. It will be useful for maintenance and to generate accurate snapshot stats.

Reviewer 3: I also think the answer to my question above is that blob's referenced here are always assumed to be uncompressed.

Notes:

1. Single-value serialization for lower and upper bounds is detailed in Appendix D.
2. For `float` and `double`, the value `-0.0` must precede `+0.0`, as in the IEEE 754 `totalOrder` predicate. NaNs are not permitted as lower or upper bounds.
3. If sort order ID is missing or unknown, then the order is assumed to be unsorted. Only data files and equality delete files should be written with a non-null order id. [Position deletes](#position-delete-files) are required to be sorted by file and position, not a table order, and should set sort order id to null. Readers must ignore sort order id for position delete files.
4. Position delete metadata can use `referenced_data_file` when all deletes tracked by the entry are in a single data file. Setting the referenced file is required for deletion vectors.
5. The `blob_offset` and `blob_size_in_bytes` fields are used to reference a specific blob in a Puffin file for direct access to a deletion vector. The values must exactly match the `offset` and `length` stored in the Puffin footer for the deletion vector blob.

> 6. The following field ids are reserved on `data_file`: 141.

Author: I also skipped 142 because that is used in #11130.

Author: Rebased on #11130.

|            |            | _optional_ | **`145  content_size_in_bytes`**  | `long`                                                                      | The length of a referenced content stored in the file; required if `content_offset` is present [5]                                                                                                                 |

Notes:

1. Single-value serialization for lower and upper bounds is detailed in Appendix D.
2. For `float` and `double`, the value `-0.0` must precede `+0.0`, as in the IEEE 754 `totalOrder` predicate. NaNs are not permitted as lower or upper bounds.
3. If sort order ID is missing or unknown, then the order is assumed to be unsorted. Only data files and equality delete files should be written with a non-null order id. [Position deletes](#position-delete-files) are required to be sorted by file and position, not a table order, and should set sort order id to null. Readers must ignore sort order id for position delete files.
4. Position delete metadata can use `referenced_data_file` when all deletes tracked by the entry are in a single data file. Setting the referenced file is required for deletion vectors.

> 5. The `content_offset` and `content_size_in_bytes` fields are used to reference a specific blob for direct access to a deletion vector. The values must exactly match the `offset` and `length` stored in the Puffin footer for the deletion vector blob.

Reviewer 3: Lets add that both fields are required for puffin files.

> 5. The `content_offset` and `content_size_in_bytes` fields are used to reference a specific blob for direct access to a deletion vector. The values must exactly match the `offset` and `length` stored in the Puffin footer for the deletion vector blob.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. The `content_offset` and `content_size_in_bytes` fields are used to reference a specific blob for direct access to a deletion vector. The values required and must exactly match the `offset` and `length` stored in the Puffin footer for the deletion vector blob.
```

| _optional_ | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`132  split_offsets`**          | `list<133: long>`                                                           | Split offsets for the data file. For example, all row group offsets in a Parquet file. Must be sorted ascending                                                                                                    |
|            | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`135  equality_ids`**           | `list<136: int>`                                                            | Field ids used to determine row equality in equality delete files. Required when `content=2` and should be null otherwise. Fields with ids listed in this column must be present in the delete file                |
| _optional_ | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`140  sort_order_id`**          | `int`                                                                       | ID representing sort order for this file [3].                                                                                                                                                                      |

> |            |            | _optional_ | **`142  first_row_id`**           | `long`                                                                      | The `_row_id` for the first row in the data file. See [First Row ID Inheritance](#first-row-id-inheritance)                                                                                                        |

Reviewer: Why do we change the row for `first_row_id`?

Author: This is a whitespace-only change. The line was longer than the others.

> |            | _optional_ | _optional_ | **`143  referenced_data_file`**   | `string`                                                                    | Fully qualified location (URI with FS scheme) of a data file that all deletes reference [4]                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer: Do we want to allow V2 writers and readers to populate the referenced data file? I generally don't mind but we will have to continue to persist the bounds anyway to not silently break existing integrations that rely on reconstructing the referenced path from the bounds. Writing the field in addition to the bounds will make things only worse and require additional work to implement.

Author: I think we should allow it. We know that it is better to use `referenced_data_file` than to use the bounds, so it makes sense to allow it. People may not choose to use it if it is duplication.

Reviewer: I agree. The problem, however, is that we won't switch to `referenced_data_file` anywhere in the library. Persisting both values won't make sense as it will increase the disk footprint and memory pressure. We can't stop writing the bounds too, as it may break external connectors like Trino.

Manifests that contain no matching files, determined using either file counts or partition summaries, may be skipped.

> For each manifest, scan predicates, which filter data rows, are converted to partition predicates, which filter partition tuples. These partition predicates are used to select data files, delete files, and deletion vector metadata relevant to the scan. This conversion uses the partition spec used to write the manifest file.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
For each manifest, scan predicates, which filter data rows, are converted to partition predicates, which filter partition tuples. These partition predicates are used to select relevant data files, delete files, and deletion vector metadata. These conversions use the partition spec which was used to write the manifest file regardless of the current partition spec.
```

I added a bunch of changes in this suggestion, some of which aren't critical to this PR but I felt like the wording could be improved. Tense matching/plural matching

Author: Thanks! I've incorporated this.

Note that for any snapshot, all file paths marked with "ADDED" or "EXISTING" may appear at most once across all manifest files in the snapshot. If a file path appears more than once, the results of the scan are undefined. Reader implementations may raise an error in this case, but are not required to do so.

Delete files and deletion vector metadata that match the filters must be applied to data files at read time, limited by the following scope rules.

* A deletion vector must be applied to a data file when all of the following are true:
    - The data file's `file_path` is equal to the deletion vector's `referenced_data_file`
    - The data file's data sequence number is _less than or equal to_ the deletion vector's data sequence number

>     - The data file's partition (both spec and partition values) is equal [4] to the deletion vector's partition

Reviewer 6: Not sure why we need this requirement, how would it be possible for the first 2 conditions be true but not this one?

Author: Yeah, I debated whether to keep this or not and ended up deciding that it is helpful. The second requirement should also be impossible if the first requirement is true.

I kept both of these because I want people reading the spec to understand that these can be relied on in the scan planning algorithm. If this only said that the `file_path` must match, then implementers may think that they need to consider _all_ deletion vectors without first filtering by partition and data sequence number.

Reviewer: Using the correct spec and partition for deletion vectors is important so that we can skip them using partition predicates, just like we skip position delete files today.

* A _position_ delete file must be applied to a data file when all of the following are true:
    - The data file's `file_path` is equal to the delete file's `referenced_data_file` if it is non-null
    - The data file's data sequence number is _less than or equal to_ the delete file's data sequence number
    - The data file's partition (both spec and partition values) is equal [4] to the delete file's partition

>     - There is no deletion vector that must be applied to the data file (when added, such a vector must contain all deletes from existing position delete files)

Reviewer: Correct, this is how the design doc proposes it.

Reviewer 7: does this condition apply to eq delete application as well?

Author: @szehon-ho, this does not apply to equality deletes.

This is a fantastic question to consider. It would be great if we could add a rule like this one for equality deletes because writers that produce positional deletes will almost always apply equality deletes and encode them in the new DVs.

However, there's at least one big issue: concurrent commits would require re-scanning data. Imagine a writer is nearly done with a MERGE that uses DVs and has created a DV with all of the positions previously deleted by both positional and equality delete files. While the metadata update and commit is happening, a new equality delete comes in and commits first. If we were to require that the DV of the MERGE commit replaces the new equality deletes, the MERGE job would potentially need to go re-scan data files in order to find deleted row positions. That could be a very expensive operation because the equality delete could apply to an entire partition of data.

There is also a similar cost for maintaining position deletes, but in that case we have the metadata to load and union DVs quickly, as opposed to scanning potentially hundreds of files for newly deleted records at commit time. Because position deletes are much more targeted, there are fewer false positives (one goal of this update!) and the work to merge them is lower.

Reviewer: This is indeed an interesting option to consider. If we add a way to annotate a DV with the data sequence of the scan, we can ignore all equality deletes prior to that.

## Delete Formats

This section details how to encode row-level deletes in Iceberg delete files. Row-level deletes are added by v2 and are not supported in v1. Deletion vectors are added in v3 and are not supported in v2 or earlier. Position delete files must not be added to v3 tables, but existing position delete files are valid.

There are three types of row-level deletes:
* Deletion vectors (DVs) identify deleted rows within a single referenced data file by position in a bitmap
* Position delete files identify deleted rows by file location and row position
* Equality delete files identify deleted rows by the value of one or more columns

> Deletion vectors are a binary representation of deletes for a single data file that is more efficient at execution time than position delete files. Unlike equality or position delete files, there can be at most one deletion vector for a given data file in a table. Writers must detect concurrently added deletion vectors and merge multiple vectors for a given data file before committing.

Reviewer 6: I think the wording around `concurrently added` may be a little confusing here. Since all writes are serializable there really aren't any concurrently added deletion vectors, just deletion vectors that already apply to a given data file. 

Maybe

"Before committing writers must combine any new delete vector for a data file with the existing vector for that file if it exists. If any position delete files exist, the new delete vector should be combined with the information from those position delete files. "

I'm not quite sure on what the wording should be so this may not be better.

Author: Yeah, I think you're right that stating the requirement is the correct approach. We can say that writers must ensure that there is only one delete vector for a data file.

Both position and equality delete files allow encoding deleted row values with a delete. This can be used to reconstruct a stream of changes to a table.

### Deletion Vectors

Delete vectors identify deleted rows of a file by encoding deleted positions in a bitmap. A set bit at position P indicates that the row at position P is deleted.

Deletion vectors are stored using the `delete-vector-v1` blob definition from the [Puffin spec][puffin-spec].

Deletion vectors support positive 64-bit positions, but are optimized for cases where most positions fit in 32 bits by using a collection of 32-bit Roaring bitmaps. 64-bit positions are divided into a 32-bit "key" using the most significant 4 bytes and a 32-bit position using the least significant 4 bytes. For each key in the set of positions, a 32-bit Roaring bitmap is maintained to store a set of 32-bit positions for that key.

To test whether a certain position is set, its most significant 4 bytes (the key) are used to find a 32-bit bitmap and the least significant 4 bytes are tested for inclusion in the bitmap. If a bitmap is not found for the key, then it is not set.

> Delete manifests track deletion vectors individually by the containing file location, starting offset of the DV magic bytes, and total length of the deletion vector blob. Multiple deletion vectors can stored in the same file. There are no restrictions on the data files that can be referenced by deletion vectors in the same file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Delete manifests track deletion vectors individually by the containing file location, starting offset of the DV magic bytes, and total length of the deletion vector blob. Multiple deletion vectors can be stored in the same file. There are no restrictions on the data files that can be referenced by deletion vectors in the same file.
```

> Delete manifests track deletion vectors individually by the containing file location, starting offset of the DV magic bytes, and total length of the deletion vector blob. Multiple deletion vectors can stored in the same file. There are no restrictions on the data files that can be referenced by deletion vectors in the same file.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Delete manifests track deletion vectors individually by the containing file location, starting offset of the DV magic bytes, and total length of the deletion vector blob. Multiple deletion vectors can stored in the same file. There are no restrictions on which data files can be referenced by deletion vectors in the same puffin file.
```

Author: I think this should use `that` instead of `which` because "no restrictions on which" is unclear. The phrase "on which" typically refers to the preceding noun, as in the phrase "restrictions on which atomicity depends".

I'll update to call out these are "Puffin" files.

## Delete Formats

> This section details how to encode row-level deletes in Iceberg delete files. Row-level deletes are added by v2 and are not supported in v1. Deletion vectors are added in v3 and are not supported in v2 or earlier. Position delete files must not be added to v3 tables, but existing position delete files are valid.

Reviewer: Shall we add some notes that the first ever operation after migrating table to V3 must produce a DV that includes all previous position deletes for that file? And that implementations can safely discard all file-scoped delete files but have to keep partition-scoped delete files.

Author: I don't think that this is the right place for it. The spec should state requirements and these points are covered in more specific requirements. This states the requirement to not add non-DV position delete files to v3 tables, and the section on delete vectors states the requirement that when you write a DV, it must include all existing position deletes for the file:

> If a DV is written for a data file, it must replace all previously written position delete files so that when a DV is present, readers can safely ignore matching position delete files.

There's a good opportunity to add context down in the v3 section that outlines the changes though. I'll add a note there.

Author: There was already quite a bit in that section, but I added the point about partition-scoped delete files:

> Position delete files that contain deletes for more than one data file need to be kept in table metadata until all deletes are replaced by DVs

Row-level delete files (both equality and position delete files) are valid Iceberg data files: files must use valid Iceberg formats, schemas, and column projection. It is recommended that these delete files are written using the table's default file format.

Row-level delete files and deletion vectors are tracked by manifests. A separate set of manifests is used for delete files and DVs, but the same manifest schema is used for both data and delete manifests. Deletion vectors are tracked individually by file location, offset, and length within the containing file. Deletion vector metadata must include the referenced data file.

Both position and equality delete files allow encoding deleted row values with a delete. This can be used to reconstruct a stream of changes to a table.

### Deletion Vectors

Deletion vectors identify deleted rows of a file by encoding deleted positions in a bitmap. A set bit at position P indicates that the row at position P is deleted.

> These vectors are stored using the `delete-vector-v1` blob definition from the [Puffin spec][puffin-spec].

Author: Good catch. Thanks!

> Deletion vectors support positive 64-bit positions, but are optimized for cases where most positions fit in 32 bits by using a collection of 32-bit Roaring bitmaps. 64-bit positions are divided into a 32-bit "key" using the most significant 4 bytes and a 32-bit sub-position using the least significant 4 bytes. For each key in the set of positions, a 32-bit Roaring bitmap is maintained to store a set of 32-bit sub-positions for that key.

Reviewer 3: nit: I think this paragraph and the next one are somewhat redundant with the puffin spec (or if they do provide additional information, I think consolidating in puffin makes sense, since the operations would like change for a v2 bitmap).

Author: Isn't the context important here? I think it makes sense to have it in both places because they describe the same thing.

Reviewer: I'd say it is helpful to have it here.

Reviewer 3: I don't feel strong, but I think all of the details on optimization and lookup probably belong as an implementation detail in puffin.  As stated there isn't enough information to actually implement reading the file, and if the underlying structure changes these sections would become irrelevant.  I think the high level logic, is that deletion vectors represent row IDs that should be deleted the presence of a row number in the vector indicates the row should not be read.

> To test whether a certain position is set, its most significant 4 bytes (the key) are used to find a 32-bit bitmap and the least significant 4 bytes (the sub-position) are tested for inclusion in the bitmap. If a bitmap is not found for the key, then it is not set.

Reviewer 7: Should be combined with previous paragraph, I feel its continuing the concept of the last sentence of that paragraph.

> Delete manifests track deletion vectors individually by the containing file location (`file_path`), starting offset of the DV magic bytes (`blob_offset`), and total length of the deletion vector blob (`blob_size_in_bytes`). Multiple deletion vectors can be stored in the same file. There are no restrictions on the data files that can be referenced by deletion vectors in the same Puffin file.

Reviewer 7: what do you mean no restrictions?  I thought one DV blob refer to one data file, from the previous section?  And obviously you have to make sure the data file has compatible partition spec, seq number.

Author: Because each DV blob is tracked by the partition of the data file it references, you can combine DVs across partitions into Puffin files. That allows us to have a lot fewer files but maintain the benefits of having partition-scoped deletes.

Reviewer 7: Got it, i think the language can be clearer?  'no restrictions on the number of data files referenced by deleteion vectors in the same Puffin file'?

> At most one deletion vector is allowed per data file in a table. If a DV is written for a data file, it must replace all previously written position delete files so that when a DV is present, readers can safely ignore matching position delete files.

Reviewer 7: > At most one deletion vector is allowed per data file in a table.

I guess this is pretty critical, and answer my question in https://docs.google.com/document/d/18Bqhr-vnzFfQk1S4AgRISkA_5_m5m32Nnc2Cw0zn2XM/edit?disco=AAABWolDRwg , just had a question how is this implemented?  In spark, do we cluster delete writers by data-files?  Not to block the spec, just curious here.

Author: Yes, one of the v2 optimizations that Anton built is to use file-scoped positional deletes rather than partition-scoped positional deletes. I think we've been recommending this for a while because it makes planning much faster (you can use a map keyed by `referenced_data_file`) and dramatically reduces false-positives, making actual runtime faster too.

Reviewer 4: Should we explicitly state that this is for a single snapshot? Each data file may have different DVs in different snapshots.

Author: @wgtmac, good catch. I've updated this to `snapshot` to be more clear.

[puffin-spec]: https://iceberg.apache.org/puffin-spec/

### Position Delete Files

Position-based delete files identify deleted rows by file and position in one or more data files, and may optionally contain the deleted row.

> _Note: Position delete files are **deprecated** in v3. Existing position deletes must be written to delete vectors when updating the position deletes for a data file._

Reviewer 3: Is there a technical reason to force deprecation here?

Author: Yes! Deletion vectors are much better for creating a stream of changes from tables. They are also just faster in general so we want to switch over to using them.

Reviewer: There are many optimizations enabled by knowing there is a DV for a data file, this was one of the points in the design doc.

Reviewer 3: On the flip side a counter argument, is that requriing DVs means more work for writers that want to support some portions of V3 specification but not upgrade to DVs (despite them being better).  It seems other places iceberg has taken the stand that optimizations are not required for writers (e.g. sequence number inheritance).

Reviewer: > optimizations are not required for writers (e.g. sequence number inheritance).

Could you elaborate? Not sure I got.

Reviewer 3: My understanding is that Snapshot/Sequence number inheritance is only turned on via a configuration flag for Iceberg tables for writers.  It is not required that writers "must" make snapshot id null for new files added.  Similarly, I'm asking that if it really needs to be made a requirement that DVs must be written, even though they are better.

Author: Actually, Iceberg is fairly strict about writing correct and well-maintained metadata, but we are careful to be backward-compatible. Sequence number and snapshot ID inheritance are required in v2. I think what you're referring to here is that we made snapshot ID inheritance available in v1 with a flag to enable it (and break compatibility with some readers).

Reviewer 3: I guess what I'm referring to in this case might have been considered a [bug that was addressed](https://github.com/apache/iceberg/commit/50c5f267b7f2919fec77f8f690412c0cb24b0de5).  But the spec has never mandated inheritance "must" be used.

I think the question still stands on whether from a spec perspective this should be mandated ("must") or ("should").  I guess I'm OK with "must"  given clarification below on existing delete files are present but it still feels like we might be overly strict.

Reviewer: The snapshot and sequence number inheritance was always required in V2 tables from the spec perspective, it just took us a bit of time to get rid of the legacy V1 logic everywhere. The flag was there only to enable that behavior in V1 tables, which could break older readers. That's why it was safe to merge the referenced PR as it simply aligned the implementation with the spec.

We know the new representation is better. I think it is OK to be strict in this case. We were very flexible with the design of equality deletes. For instance, we allowed adding any number of global equality delete files. We thought  implementations would be smart and would not misuse this concept. Yet, we have seen so many cases where tables were unreadable after engines produces a ton of equality deletes without ever compacting them. I think the new layout forces implementations to provide the best possible behavior for position deletes as well as enables various optimizations like CDC generation mentioned by Ryan.

Both position and equality delete files allow encoding deleted row values with a delete. This can be used to reconstruct a stream of changes to a table.

### Deletion Vectors

Deletion vectors identify deleted rows of a file by encoding deleted positions in a bitmap. A set bit at position P indicates that the row at position P is deleted.

These vectors are stored using the `deletion-vector-v1` blob definition from the [Puffin spec][puffin-spec].

Deletion vectors support positive 64-bit positions, but are optimized for cases where most positions fit in 32 bits by using a collection of 32-bit Roaring bitmaps. 64-bit positions are divided into a 32-bit "key" using the most significant 4 bytes and a 32-bit sub-position using the least significant 4 bytes. For each key in the set of positions, a 32-bit Roaring bitmap is maintained to store a set of 32-bit sub-positions for that key.

To test whether a certain position is set, its most significant 4 bytes (the key) are used to find a 32-bit bitmap and the least significant 4 bytes (the sub-position) are tested for inclusion in the bitmap. If a bitmap is not found for the key, then it is not set.

> Delete manifests track deletion vectors individually by the containing file location (`file_path`), starting offset of the DV magic bytes (`content_offset`), and total length of the deletion vector blob (`content_size_in_bytes`). Multiple deletion vectors can be stored in the same file. There are no restrictions on the data files that can be referenced by deletion vectors in the same Puffin file.

Reviewer: The idea is that `content_offset` will point to the offset of the DV blob, which starts with the length of the magic bytes and deletion vector.

Author: Fixed.

At most one deletion vector is allowed per data file in a snapshot. If a DV is written for a data file, it must replace all previously written position delete files so that when a DV is present, readers can safely ignore matching position delete files.

[puffin-spec]: https://iceberg.apache.org/puffin-spec/

### Position Delete Files

Position-based delete files identify deleted rows by file and position in one or more data files, and may optionally contain the deleted row.

> _Note: Position delete files are **deprecated** in v3. Existing position deletes must be written to delete vectors when updating the position deletes for a data file._

Reviewer: `delete vectors` -> `deletion vectors`?

Author: These are synonyms.

    * For a single-arg transform, `source-id` should be written; if `source-ids` is also written it should be a single-element list of `source-id`
    * For multi-arg transforms, `source-ids` should be written; `source-id` should be set to the first element of `source-ids`

Row-level delete changes:

* Deletion vectors are added in v3, stored using the Puffin `deletion-vector-v1` blob type
* Manifests are updated to track deletion vectors:

>     * `referenced_data_file` was added and can be used for both delection vectors (required) and v2 position delete files that contain deletes for only one data file (optional)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * `referenced_data_file` was added and can be used for both deletion vectors (required) and v2 position delete files that contain deletes for only one data file (optional)
```

I know these are awesome but lets stick to standard naming :)
